---
title: "Testing, testing. Testing 123"
date: 2015/01/02
author: Ivo Herweijer
the_summary: Testing software is one of the most important aspects of software development.
---

## Testing
Testing software is one of the most important aspects of software development. It ensures that the code
you are writing is doing what it is supposed to do. Now and in the future.  

Having a comprehensive set of tests for your code gives __you__ confidence that it does what it is
supposed to do. It also helps bestow that confidence on __others__. Other people who are using or maintaining
your code.

Running tests some time after you created your code, for instance after some components you rely on have been
updated, will tell you if your code still works or you need to make changes.

### Different tests for different purposes
There are a lot of different kinds of test. I've list a couple here, in order in which they are used in a
real programming project:

- Unit tests  
  Tests for individual methods, classes and modules.
- Functional tests  
  Does your code do what the end user expects ?
- Integration tests  
  Put all the individual pieces of code together. Does it still work and do what it should do ?
- Performance tests  
  Response times for one development user won't be a problem. What happens when 100 users are
  using the software at the same time ?
- Penetration tests  
  Security needs to be built into your code from the start, but you should always test what happens
  when a skilled penetration tester throws some unexpected input at your software.
  How far can the pen-tester go ?

### Waterfall versus Agile
I'm not going to explain in-depth what Waterfall and Agile means. You can look it up on Wikipedia.

Basically, use the Waterfall method if: you are designing a spaceship to fly to Mars, some medical
device or anything that __must work according to a specification__ with a minimal chance of errors.
This means analyzing, describing, documenting every aspect of the software before it is built.

If you are designing the next instant messaging platform, business app or anything where the __exact
specifications are not known in advance__, but will change along the way, use an Agile development
method.

The following topics are specific to Agile.

### TDD
Test Driven Development: Write your tests first, then write your code.

When you develop a new piece of code or add a new function to existing code, first define a set of
tests that the final working code should pass. Next run the tests. Most likely all tests will fail.
Now start implementing and refactoring your code until all tests pass.

The main advantage of this way of working is that you focus first on __what__ your code should do,
instead of on how it should work. In practice the effect is that you write less code.

### BDD
Behavior Driven Development: an extension to TDD to include the clients functional requirements.

Before implementing any new code you need to know what the desired behavior of that code should
be. In other words what does the client, paying your bills, want.
This involves the client and the developer speaking the same language. A language also known as
plain English. BDD uses a fixed layout to write down _user stories_.

Here is an example copied from the
<a href="https://github.com/cucumber/cucumber/wiki/Background" target="_blank">Cucumber</a>
documentation:

> __Feature:__ Multiple site support  
> &nbsp;&nbsp;__As a__ Mephisto site owner  
> &nbsp;&nbsp;__I want to__ host blogs for different people  
> &nbsp;&nbsp;__In order to__ make gigantic piles of money  

> &nbsp;&nbsp;__Background:__  
> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__Given__ a global administrator named "Greg"  
> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__And__ a blog named "Greg's anti-tax rants"  
> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__And__ a customer named "Dr. Bill"  
> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__And__ a blog named "Expensive Therapy" owned by "Dr. Bill"  

> &nbsp;&nbsp;__Scenario:__ Dr. Bill posts to his own blog  
> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__Given__ I am logged in as Dr. Bill  
> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__When__ I try to post to "Expensive Therapy"  
> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__Then__ I should see "Your article was published."  

Each feature usually has many scenario's.

### Test tools and automation
Ruby has one of the most advanced set of testing tools available anywhere.

For supporting TDD style testing __rspec__ is very popular.
BDD style testing is often done with __cucumber__. Cucumber lets you translate functional
requirements written in plain English into executable (!) tests for your Ruby code.

Testing is not supposed to involve additional work. This would soon lead to less testing.
The answer is automating tests. When the test automation tool notices you have changed a (Ruby)
file, part or all of the tests are executed again. And you will be notified of newly failing or
passing tests.

Test automation can for instance be done with __autotest__ or __guard__. Guard can automate lots
of other tasks for you as well.
